conda-pypi Beta blog (#382)
conda/conda-dot-org: blog/2026-06-24-bridging-conda-and-pypi-ecosystems.md

---
title: "Bridging conda and PyPI ecosystems: install PyPI packages with conda install"
slug: "2026-06-24-bridging-conda-and-pypi-ecosystems"
authors: [dashagurova, dbouquin]
tags: [conda, pip, PyPI, conda-pypi]
description: "Stop reaching for `pip` inside your conda environments. With the conda-pypi beta, `conda install` can now pull pure Python packages from PyPI directly, alongside your conda packages in a single solve."
image: img/blog/2026-06-24-bridging-conda-and-pypi-ecosystems/conda-pypi-logo.png
---

***tl;dr:** Stop reaching for `pip` inside your conda environments. With the conda-pypi beta, `conda install` can now pull pure Python packages from PyPI directly, alongside your conda packages*

<!-- truncate -->

> You needed a package. It wasn't on conda-forge. You typed `pip install <package>` and went back to work.
> Most conda users have done this. Most of us have also paid for it later, when the environment broke in a way that took half a day to untangle. Users have built up coping strategies over the years: more careful pinning, better hygiene, install order rules, accepting that conda environments with pip in them are a little fragile. But users have no choice because [Python Package Index (PyPI)](https://pypi.org/) is where most Python packages live. The newest libraries land there first. The long-tail packages never make it to conda channels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You needed a package. It wasn't on your configured conda channel. You typed `pip install <package>` and went back to work.
Most conda users have done this. Most of us have also paid for it later, when the environment broke in a way that took half a day to untangle. Users have built up coping strategies over the years: more careful pinning, better hygiene, install order rules, accepting that conda environments with pip in them are a little fragile. But users have no choice because [Python Package Index (PyPI)](https://pypi.org/) is where Open Source Python packages are primarily released. For various reasons the long-tail never makes it to regular conda channels.
```

> Conda community has been working on [various approaches](https://conda.github.io/conda-pypi/why/potential-solutions/) to this problem, and we are very excited for you to try it. Starting in `conda 26.5`, you can opt into conda-pypi beta where conda's solver knows about packages on PyPI. Not by calling pip behind the scenes. Not by converting wheels into conda packages first. PyPI packages become real candidates the solver can consider, the same way conda packages are.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The conda community has been working on [various approaches](https://conda.github.io/conda-pypi/why/potential-solutions/) to this problem, and we are very excited for you to try our latest project. Starting in `conda 26.5.0`, you can opt into the conda-pypi beta in which conda's solver knows about pure Python packages hosted on PyPI. Not by calling pip behind the scenes and not by converting wheels into conda packages first. PyPI packages become real candidates the solver can consider, the same way conda packages are.
```

## Why mixing conda and pip breaks things

> Plenty has been written about this, so we'll keep it short. Conda has its own picture of your environment. It knows what conda installed, what those packages depend on, and what versions agree with each other. When you run `pip install` in your conda environment, pip builds its own picture, separately, and writes files on top of conda's. Neither tool has the full view. Things look fine until something later asks both halves to agree, they can't, and you're three Stack Overflow tabs deep trying to figure out which one moved.

Reviewer: That's a little defensive, don't think we need to be that, it's important to elaborate on this in this blog post

> The reasin is simple - `conda` and `pip` come from different ecosystems with different ideas about what a package even is. Mahe Iram Khan made the case in in [*Conda and pip are two ecosystems, not just tools*](https://conda.org/blog/2026-05-07-conda-and-pip-ecosystems), and Jannis Leidel and Daniel Bast went deeper in the [*Conda ≠ PyPI: Why Conda Is More Than a Package Manager*](https://conda.org/blog/conda-is-not-pypi) blog series.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason is simple - `conda` and `pip` come from different ecosystems with different ideas about what a package even is. Mahe Iram Khan made the case in in [*Conda and pip are two ecosystems, not just tools*](https://conda.org/blog/2026-05-07-conda-and-pip-ecosystems), and Jannis Leidel and Daniel Bast went deeper in the [*Conda ≠ PyPI: Why Conda Is More Than a Package Manager*](https://conda.org/blog/conda-is-not-pypi) blog series.
```

## Getting started: opt in to try

Make sure to update conda first:

```shell
conda install -n base "conda>=26.5.3"
```

Then opt in by switching to the rattler solver and adding the conda-pypi channel:

```shell
conda config --set solver rattler
conda config --append channels conda-pypi
```

> The first command switches your conda solver to rattler, a drop-in replacement Rust-based solver that's also currently in beta and on track to become the default in the next major conda release. Rattler is a faster, modern alternative built by the team at Prefix.dev, and it's the solver that powers Pixi.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first command switches your conda solver to a drop-in replacement Rust-based solver that's also currently in beta. The solver is based on the [rattler project](https://github.com/conda/rattler), which is a collection of Rust crates implementing conda standards and core primitives, by the team at Prefix.dev. Behind the scenes it uses the same solver backend that pixi is relying on.
```

No need to jump the gun, and we need to be specific about this.

> The second command appends the conda-pypi channel. It's a public channel hosted on anaconda.org that gives conda a view of Python packages from PyPI (around 600,000 pure Python wheels). Appending makes it a fallback source, for when your conda channel is missing that one package or dependency you need. Channel priority works the way it always has, and we recommend keeping your conda channels first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second command appends the conda-pypi channel to your channel configuration. It's a public channel hosted on anaconda.org that gives conda access to the metadata of around 600,000 pure Python wheels on PyPI. Appending makes it a fallback source, for when your conda channel is missing that one package or dependency you need. Channel priority works the way it always has, and we recommend keeping your regular conda channels first.
```
